ParlaMint-GB_2019-12-17-lords.u1	My Lords, it not being convenient for Her Majesty personally to be present here this day, she has been pleased to cause a Commission under the Great Seal to be prepared in order to the holding of this Parliament.
ParlaMint-GB_2019-12-17-lords.u2	My Lords, it may be convenient if I make a brief statement about the process for taking the oath and affirming today. After I have taken the oath, the most reverend Primates the Archbishops of Canterbury and York, the party leaders, and the Convenor of the Cross Benches will then take the oath, followed by the Senior Deputy Speaker. The other Front-Bench Members will then take the oath or affirm, including the occupants of the Privy Council Benches by the Bar The House has decided that priority at this point should also be given to any Member with a disability or impaired mobility who is able to take the oath or affirm. Other Members will then take the oath or affirm. Members should come to the Table from the Bar end of the Chamber, bringing their Writ of Summons. The annunciators will indicate from time to time the number of Members waiting in the Chamber to take the oath or affirm. When all Members present have taken the oath or affirmed, the House will adjourn during pleasure, resuming at intervals until 7.30 pm tonight. The time of resumption will be shown in each case on the annunciators At some point during today’s sitting, I expect that the Royal Commission will resume to confirm Her Majesty’s Royal Approbation for the Commons’ choice of Speaker. That may happen as early as 3.45 pm, but it is of course dependent on proceedings in the Commons.
ParlaMint-GB_2019-12-17-lords.u3	My Lords, I beg to acquaint the House that a Commission has been issued under Her Majesty’s Great Seal to several Lords therein named authorising the said Lords to declare in the name and on behalf of Her Majesty Her Majesty’s approbation of the choice of the Commons of Sir Lindsay Hoyle to be their Speaker.
ParlaMint-GB_2019-12-17-lords.u4	Sir Lindsay, we are commanded to assure you that Her Majesty is so fully sensible of your zeal in the public service, and of your ample sufficiency to execute the arduous duties which her faithful Commons have selected you to discharge, that Her Majesty does most readily approve and confirm you as their Speaker.
ParlaMint-GB_2019-12-17-lords.u5	Mr Speaker, we have it further in Command to inform you that Her Majesty does most readily confirm all the rights and privileges which have ever been granted to or conferred upon the Commons by Her Majesty or any of her Royal predecessors. With respect to yourself, Sir, though Her Majesty is sensible that you stand in no need of such assurance, Her Majesty will ever place the most favourable construction upon your words and actions.
